# Renderers plug-ins directory
This is the renderers plug-ins directory.

## How FreeCAD-render works with external renderers
To obtain a rendering, given a specific external renderer, FreeCAD-render writes a file (the *input file*) in renderer format and runs the external renderer on this file. As a result, the external renderer outputs an image file.

The input file is written in what is called a *Scene Description Language (SDL)*, which is specific to the renderer.

FreeCAD-render builds the input file by instantiating a *template* with *descriptions* of FreeCAD objects in renderer SDL:
* The template basically contains blank sections to be filled with objects descriptions, following the general structure expected by the renderer, and also contains predefined settings designed for given use cases: standard scene, sunlight scene...
* The objects descriptions in renderer SDL are generated by ad hoc plug-ins.


## How to add support for a new external renderer
### Files required
To add support for a new renderer, you will need to add at least 3 files:
- A renderer plug-in file,
- An icon file,
- One or more templates file(s),

| Files            | Number    | Location       | File format          |
| ---------------- | --------: | -------------- | ---------------------|
| Renderer plug-in | 1         | This directory | Python               |
| Icon             | 1         | ../icons       | Image (png, svg...)  |
| Templates        | 1 or more | ../templates   | Your renderer format | 

Optionally, but in a strongly recommended way, you will also add a few entries in module's Preferences.
In particular, it is strongly recommended to include the following parameters:
- the path to the external renderer executable (optionally splitted into CLI and GUI executablesp pathes, if the renderer provides both),
- the command line parameters.


### Renderer plug-in
#### Naming
 
You will need to make sure your plugin file is named with the same name (case sensitive)
that you will use everywhere to describe your renderer. Examples: `Appleseed.py` or
`Povray.py`

#### Contents
The plugin must contain the following functions:

* `write_object(name, mesh, color, alpha)`

Expected behaviour: return a string containing a mesh object description in renderer SDL

* `write_camera(pos, rot, up, target, name)`

Expected behaviour: return a string containing a camera description in renderer SDL

* `write_pointlight(name, pos, color, power)`

Expected behaviour: return a string containing an point light description in renderer SDL

* `write_arealight(name, pos, size_u, size_v, color, power)`

Expected behaviour: return a string containing an area light description in renderer SDL

* `render(project, prefix, external, output, width, height)`

Expected behaviour: render the given project, by calling the external renderer.
This function is in charge of writing the renderer input file, and calling the external renderer executable. It should return the path to the generated image file.

#### Guidelines
- Before starting, have a look at other existing renderers plug-ins. You can use one of them as a template for a new plugin
- Use Python's Format Specification Mini Language in `write_*` functions
- Carefully read your renderer documentation, especially the Scene Description Language chapters. For future reviewing, do not hesitate to add links to the documentation in your code, as comments.
- Pay attention to the coordinates systems. External renderers may use different coordinates than FreeCAD (inverted coordinates etc.)

### Templates

#### Naming
The name of the file should contain a reference to your renderer, and then a reference to the use case which the template addresses.
The file extension should be the extension expected by the renderer in its input file.
Example: `appleseed_standard.appleseed`

### Icon file

#### Naming
The name of the icon file should be the same as the plug-in file. Example: `Appleseed.svg`.

Recommended format is Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG).

### Preferences

Preferences settings are declared in `ui/RenderSetting.ui` file
